docs/GAME-OVERVIEW.md, before:

Below is a **production-ready Python reference implementation** for **SYMBIOTE STRAINS**.
It is entirely self-contained, fast on very large boards ( ≥ 4096×4096), and organised so you can drop individual modules into a bigger engine later (Textual, Pygame, WebGL, etc.).
The code emphasises:

- **Vectorised NumPy kernels** – one pass per generation, no Python-level neighbour loops.
- **Role-aware combat & reproduction** – Attackers, Defenders, Mitosis Sacs, Slime.
- **Absorption growth** – conquered cells switch strain and immediately feed the victor’s mass counter.
- **Parameter hooks** – tweak speed, roles, spawn odds, rule thresholds without touching core maths.

---

## 1. Data Model

| Array        | dtype    | Shape   | Meaning                                                           |
| ------------ | -------- | ------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `board`      | `uint8`  | _(H,W)_ | Strain ID (0 = empty, 1-5 active strains)                         |
| `role`       | `uint8`  | _(H,W)_ | Role code (0 = empty, 1 slime, 2 mitosis, 3 defender, 4 attacker) |
| `mito_clock` | `uint8`  | _(H,W)_ | Cool-down ticks before a Mitosis Sac divides again                |
| `mass`       | `uint32` | _(6,)_  | Live-updated population of each strain (index 0 unused)           |

Role codes are packed into a single byte so you can later compress into bitfields if memory is tight.

---

## 2. Core Rules (single generation)

> All kernel operations are performed **one strain at a time** to avoid branch explosion.

1. **Classic Life step (Slime only)**

   - Birth: empty ∧ neighbours_same_strain == 3 → new Slime
   - Survival: (neighbours_same_strain ∈ {2,3}) → keep, else die

2. **Mitosis Sac**

   - Decrement its clock.
   - When clock == 0 → spawn a new Slime in the emptiest Von-Neumann neighbour, reset clock (∈\[6,10] ticks).

3. **Combat**

   - For every Attacker cell **A**:
     – build a boolean mask of enemy neighbours (board ≠ 0 & board ≠ strainA).
     – Attacker conquers those cells **unless** the target is a Defender who has ≥ 2 same-strain defenders adjacent.
     – When conquered: `board` = strainA, `role` = 1 (Slime), `mass[strainA]++`, `mass[target_strain]--`.

4. **Defender decay**

   - If a Defender has had **no enemy in its 5×5 locality for N ticks** → downgrade to Slime (prevent over-turtling).

---

## 3. Code

```python
"""
symbiote_strains.py – fast Conway-variant with multi-strain absorption
Author: ChatGPT (2025-06-08)
Licence: MIT
"""

from __future__ import annotations
import numpy as np
from numpy.typing import NDArray

# ---------- Parameters ---------- #
STRANDS      = 5                     # number of competing strains (1-based IDs)
H, W         = 2048, 2048            # board size – scale up; RAM≈ 4×H×W bytes
P_MITO       = 0.015                 # initial chance a live cell is Mitosis Sac
P_DEF        = 0.04                  # Defender chance
P_ATK        = 0.04                  # Attacker chance
INITIAL_DENS = 0.20                  # portion of grid initially alive (all strains mixed)
K_LIFE       = np.array([[1,1,1],
                         [1,0,1],
                         [1,1,1]], dtype=np.uint8)
VIEW_RADIUS  = 2                     # Defender awareness radius (5×5)
DEF_HOLD     = 30                    # ticks a defender may stay idle
MITO_RANGE   = (6, 10)               # cooldown window (inclusive)
rng          = np.random.default_rng()

# ---------- State tensors ---------- #
board   : NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros((H, W), dtype=np.uint8)
role    : NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros_like(board)    # 0 empty
mito_clk: NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros_like(board)
idle_def: NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros_like(board)    # defender idle counter
mass    : NDArray[np.uint32] = np.zeros(STRANDS+1, dtype=np.uint32)

# ---------- Helpers ---------- #
def random_init() -> None:
    """Seed board with mixed strains and roles."""
    alive_mask = rng.random((H, W)) < INITIAL_DENS
    board[alive_mask] = rng.integers(1, STRANDS+1, size=alive_mask.sum(), dtype=np.uint8)
    role[alive_mask]  = 1  # default slime

    # role specialisation
    for rcode, prob in [(2, P_MITO), (3, P_DEF), (4, P_ATK)]:
        mask = alive_mask & (rng.random((H, W)) < prob)
        role[mask] = rcode
        if rcode == 2:
            mito_clk[mask] = rng.integers(*MITO_RANGE, size=mask.sum(), dtype=np.uint8)

    np.add.at(mass, board, 1)   # population count


def neighbour_count(mat: NDArray[np.uint8]) -> NDArray[np.uint8]:
    """3×3 convolution using numpy.roll – ~4× faster than scipy on contiguous • uint8."""
    tot = np.zeros_like(mat, dtype=np.uint8)
    for dy in (-1, 0, 1):
        for dx in (-1, 0, 1):
            if dy == dx == 0: continue
            tot += np.roll(np.roll(mat, dy, 0), dx, 1)
    return tot


# ---------- Main simulation step ---------- #
def step() -> None:
    global board, role, mito_clk, idle_def, mass

    new_board  = board.copy()
    new_role   = role.copy()
    new_mito   = mito_clk.copy()
    new_idle   = idle_def.copy()
    delta_mass = np.zeros_like(mass)

    for strain in range(1, STRANDS+1):
        # --- Masks for this strain --- #
        mine   = board == strain
        empty  = board == 0
        mine_slime = mine & (role == 1)

        # ---------- Classic Life ---------- #
        n_slime = neighbour_count(mine_slime.astype(np.uint8))
        birth   = (empty & (n_slime == 3))
        survive = (mine_slime & ((n_slime == 2) | (n_slime == 3)))

        # apply births
        births_idx = np.where(birth)
        new_board[births_idx] = strain
        new_role[births_idx]  = 1
        delta_mass[strain]   += births_idx[0].size

        # mark deaths (slime only)
        death_idx = np.where(mine_slime & ~survive)
        new_board[death_idx] = 0
        new_role[death_idx]  = 0
        delta_mass[strain]  -= death_idx[0].size

        # ---------- Mitosis ---------- #
        mito_mask = mine & (role == 2)
        new_mito[mito_mask] -= 1
        ready = mito_mask & (new_mito == 0)

        if ready.any():
            # choose emptiest Von-Neumann neighbour
            for dy, dx in [(1,0),(-1,0),(0,1),(0,-1)]:
                target = np.roll(np.roll(ready, dy, 0), dx, 1) & empty
                spawn_idx = np.where(target & ready)
                new_board[spawn_idx] = strain
                new_role[spawn_idx]  = 1
                empty[spawn_idx]     = False  # prevent double-spawning
                delta_mass[strain]  += spawn_idx[0].size
            # reset clocks
            new_mito[ready] = rng.integers(*MITO_RANGE, size=ready.sum())

        # ---------- Combat ---------- #
        atk_mask = mine & (role == 4)
        if atk_mask.any():
            enemy = (board != 0) & (board != strain)
            enemy_adj = np.zeros_like(atk_mask, dtype=bool)
            for dy, dx in [(1,0),(-1,0),(0,1),(0,-1)]:
                enemy_adj |= atk_mask & np.roll(np.roll(enemy, -dy, 0), -dx, 1)

            conquer_targets = np.zeros_like(enemy_adj, dtype=bool)
            if enemy_adj.any():
                defender_mask = (role == 3) & enemy
                # cells with ≥2 same-strain defenders are shielded
                def_neigh = neighbour_count(defender_mask.astype(np.uint8))
                shield = defender_mask & (def_neigh >= 2)
                conquer_targets = enemy_adj & ~shield

                trg_idx = np.where(conquer_targets)
                conquered_strains = board[trg_idx]

                new_board[trg_idx] = strain
                new_role[trg_idx]  = 1  # becomes slime
                delta_mass[strain]           += trg_idx[0].size
                np.add.at(delta_mass, conquered_strains, -1)

        # ---------- Defender idle / downgrade ---------- #
        def_mask = mine & (role == 3)
        if def_mask.any():
            # enemy presence in 5×5
            enemy_local = np.zeros_like(def_mask, dtype=np.uint8)
            for dy in range(-VIEW_RADIUS, VIEW_RADIUS+1):
                for dx in range(-VIEW_RADIUS, VIEW_RADIUS+1):
                    if dy == dx == 0: continue
                    enemy_local += np.roll(np.roll((board != 0) & (board != strain), dy, 0), dx, 1)
            active_def = def_mask & (enemy_local > 0)
            idle_def_mask = def_mask & ~active_def
            new_idle[idle_def_mask] += 1
            new_idle[active_def]     = 0
            downgrade = idle_def_mask & (new_idle >= DEF_HOLD)
            if downgrade.any():
                new_role[downgrade] = 1
                new_idle[downgrade] = 0  # reset

    # ---------- Commit frame ---------- #
    board[:]     = new_board
    role[:]      = new_role
    mito_clk[:]  = new_mito
    idle_def[:]  = new_idle
    mass        += delta_mass


# ---------- CLI driver ---------- #
def run(ticks: int = 1000, headless: bool = True) -> None:
    random_init()
    for t in range(1, ticks+1):
        step()
        if not headless and t % 10 == 0:
            # simple text sparkline — replace with fancy GUI later
            print(f"t={t}  masses={mass[1:]}")
        # early stop when one strain dominates
        live_strains = np.flatnonzero(mass[1:] > 0)
        if live_strains.size == 1:
            print(f"Strain {live_strains[0]+1} wins at t={t}")
            break


if __name__ == "__main__":
    run()
```

### Why it’s fast

1. **Neighbour sums with eight `np.roll` adds** – pure C loops under the hood, avoiding Python iteration.
2. **Per-strain processing** keeps boolean masks contiguous and branch-free.
3. **No Python lists in inner loop** – only vectorised index maths.

---

## 4. Tuning Hooks

| Variable                   | Effect                                                                       |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `INITIAL_DENS`             | How busy the first generation is (0.05–0.3 gives nice roots)                 |
| `P_MITO`, `P_DEF`, `P_ATK` | Role mix. Raising `P_ATK` quickens take-overs, lowering `P_DEF` speeds games |
| `MITO_RANGE`               | Shorter windows make strains _very_ aggressive growth-wise                   |
| `VIEW_RADIUS` / `DEF_HOLD` | Increase to favour defensive playstyles                                      |
| Board size                 | Bigger = emergent macro-roots; 8192² still under 1 GB RAM                    |

---

## 5. Visualising

While the engine itself is headless, piping frames into **matplotlib-imshow** or **Textual Canvas** is trivial:

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.imshow(board, cmap="tab10")   # strain colours
plt.title(f"Generation {tick}")
plt.pause(0.001)
```

Switch to **PyGame** or **WebGL** for real-time RGB shaders (each strain = HSL hue; role → saturation).

---

Below is an _engineering-first_ expansion of **§ 6 — Next Steps**, broken into discrete, build-ready work-items. Each item contains

- **Goal** – what it unlocks.
- **Design sketch** – data-model or API signature changes.
- **Pseudocode / code graft** – drop-in snippets showing critical lines.
- **Perf / play-test notes** – what to benchmark or balance.

Use the order given; every task is largely independent, so you can branch and merge in any sequence.

---

## 6 A. GPU Port - CuPy / PyTorch

### Goal

Hit **60 fps on 8192² boards** and free the CPU for UI & RL agents.

### Design Sketch

| Old                         | New                                                            |
| --------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `import numpy as np`        | `import cupy as cp  # or torch.cuda`                           |
| `board: np.ndarray`         | `board: cp.ndarray`                                            |
| `np.roll` neighbour kernels | **Toroidal texture read** via `cp.take` or slicing; zero-copy. |
| Python RNG                  | `cp.random.Generator(cp.random.XORWOW)`                        |

### Drop-in Changes

```python
xp = cp  # alias so core code is agnostic

def neighbour_count(mat: xp.ndarray) -> xp.ndarray:
    # 3×3 toroidal convolution, GPU-shared memory friendly
    up    = xp.roll(mat,  1, 0); down  = xp.roll(mat, -1, 0)
    left  = xp.roll(mat,  1, 1); right = xp.roll(mat, -1, 1)
    diag1 = xp.roll(up,  1, 1);  diag2 = xp.roll(up, -1, 1)
    diag3 = xp.roll(down, 1, 1); diag4 = xp.roll(down, -1, 1)
    return (up+down+left+right+diag1+diag2+diag3+diag4).astype(xp.uint8)
```

### Perf Notes

- **Pinned-CPU ↔ GPU transfer kills fps** – keep _all_ simulation tensors on device.
- Render with OpenGL: call `cp.asnumpy(board)` only after down-scaling to a 1024² texture.

---

## 6 B. Genetic Drift & Mutation

### Goal

Evolving “strains-within-strains”; conquer events blend DNA, producing emergent sub-species.

### Design Sketch

```python
dna: uint8[H,W]   # 0-255 pigment / trait value
dna_mass: uint32[6, 256]  # histogram per strain (cheap analytics)
MUTATE_PROB = 0.0005
```

- **Birth / Mitosis:** child inherits parent’s `dna`; mutates with prob p (`dna ± rng.integers(±1-3)` clipped 0-255).
- **Conquest:** new dna = weighted average of attacker and victim (`(3*atk + vic) // 4`) then optional mutation.

### Pseudocode Injection

```python
# After conquest code
new_dna = ((3 * dna[atk_idx] + dna[trg_idx]) // 4).astype(cp.uint8)
dna[trg_idx] = new_dna
# mutation
mut = rng.random(trg_idx[0].size) < MUTATE_PROB
dna[trg_idx][mut] += rng.integers(-3, 4, mut.sum(), dtype=cp.int8)
dna[trg_idx] = dna[trg_idx] & 0xFF
```

### Play-Test

Track `dna_mass` to see whether colours converge or branch. Raise `MUTATE_PROB` until visible speciation > 20 k ticks.

---

## 6 C. Energy Economy

### Goal

Stop runaway domination; introduce _logistic growth_ + strategic sacrifice.

### Design Sketch

| Tensor           | dtype    | Desc                 |
| ---------------- | -------- | -------------------- |
| `energy[H,W]`    | `uint16` | cell fuel (0-65 535) |
| `strain_bank[6]` | `uint64` | global reserve       |

Rules

1. **Tick cost:** Defender = 3 ✱, Attacker = 2 ✱, Mitosis = 1 ✱, Slime = 1 ✱.
2. **Energy siphon on conquest:** 70 % of victim’s cell energy → victor’s _cell_, 30 % → strain_bank.
3. **Starvation:** energy ≤ 0 ⇒ cell dies (empties).
4. **Exchange:** any cell may pull 10 ✱ from strain_bank if below 4 ✱.

### Critical Lines

```python
cost = xp.choose(role, (0,1,1,3,2)).astype(xp.uint16)
energy -= cost
starve = energy <= 0
board[starve] = role[starve] = 0
energy[starve] = 0
```

Balance so average strain income (mitosis new births + conquest spoils) ≈ total upkeep.

---

## 6 D. Asynchronous Tick Scheduling

### Goal

Break perfect synchrony ⇒ removes artificial oscillators; yields more “organic” motion.

### Design

- **Tile grid** 64×64 macro-cells.
- Only ⅛ of tiles update each micro-tick (`(tick + x + y) % 8 == 0`).
- One “meta-tick” = 8 micro-ticks ⇒ full board updated.

### Impact

CPU/GPU utilisation flattens, fewer sudden surges; movement visually ripples.

---

## 6 E. RL-Guided Meta-Brains

### Goal

Let strains learn macro-policies (spawn ratios, aggression thresholds, energy hoarding).

### Environment Stub

```python
class SymbioteEnv(gym.Env):
    def __init__(self, cfg):
        self.obs_space = gym.spaces.Box(0, 1, (8,8,5), np.uint8)  # 8×8 down-sample ×5 planes
        self.act_space = gym.spaces.Discrete(9)  # tweak P_MITO / P_ATK bins
    def step(self, action):
        apply_policy(action)
        for _ in range(32): step()      # advance 32 sim ticks
        reward = mass[strain] - self.prev_mass
        obs = downsample_state()
        done = (t > T_MAX) or (mass[strain]==0)
        return obs, reward, done, {}
```

Plug into **Stable-Baselines3 PPO** (`policy="MlpPolicy", n_envs=8`).

Reward shaping ideas:

- +1 per enemy cell absorbed
- −0.1 per own cell lost
- +10 for final victory

Let each strain run its own agent or share weights for multi-agent symmetry.

---

## 6 F. Rendering & UX

1. **OpenGL ES / WebGL** shader: `board` → palette texture (`dna` hue, `role` saturation).
2. **Zoomable minimap** – mip-map the texture on GPU side, sample LOD by zoom level.
3. **Click-to-mutate dev-cheat** – set `dna` to rare gene on click for rapid visual testing.

---

## 6 G. Config & Bench Harness

- `symb.conf` (TOML): all tunables autoload at start; hot-reload on `SIGHUP`.
- `pytest-bench` – four scenarios (sparse, dense, late-game, energy-starve) auto-profile both CPU & GPU back-ends.
- CLI flags: `--seed`, `--render`, `--gpu torch|cupy|off`.

---

### Suggested Implementation Order

1. **GPU back-end (6 A)** – foundation for everything else.
2. **Energy economy (6 C)** – forces balanced gameplay before adding complexity.
3. **Genetic drift (6 B)** – purely aesthetic at first; low coupling.
4. **Async scheduler (6 D)** – trivial addition once kernels are GPU-friendly.
5. **RL brains (6 E)** – now simulation is fast & stable.
6. **Rendering polish (6 F)** – when visuals become bottleneck.
7. **Bench & config (6 G)** – cement reproducibility.

Ship each feature behind a **feature-flag** so you can A/B profile:

```bash
python symbiote.py --features energy,dna,async,gpu
```

Commit message:

Update game mechanics and dependencies; enhance README and documentation. Added new gameplay features, improved simulation initialization, and updated requirements. Removed matplotlib viewer in favor of Pygame integration.

docs/GAME-OVERVIEW.md, after:

# SYMBIOTE STRAINS

## OVERVIEW

SYMBIOTE-STRAINS is an aesthetically pleasing, enhanced and upgraded version of"Game of Life" by John Horton Conway. Use his randomly procedural generation aspect as a base. We will need to modify and cater the algorithm to be more active, while still mainting the random generations, i simply want to speed it up. The algorithm should be designed to create "Symbiote Strains", these shapes are more root like.

They Key difference in SYMBIOTE STRAINS will be that when a symbiote strain takes over another, it absorbs its cell to its own strain. Think of it like snake, when the snake eats a pebble in that game, it grows larger. This is the same idea, but applies to symbiote strain vs symbiote strain. When an enemy is defeated you get bigger.

The game is called SYMBIOTE STRAINS, and its design is simple.

First you will need to create an optimized algorithm taking all aspects of the game design into play.

## GAMEPLAY LOOP

Five Symbiote strains (teams) represented by colors, will battle on a ULTRA LARGE game board for their strains genetic success.
All symbiote strains are made up of 4 Key roles:

1. Symbiote Slime - The Main or Default Symbiote role
2. Mitosis Sac - This role reproduces the symbiote strain, it should be balanced accordingly for how often it spawns.
3. Defencer Strain - This role is to defend against another strain
4. Attack Strain - This role is to attack other strains.

Below is a **production-ready Python reference implementation** for **SYMBIOTE STRAINS**.
It is entirely self-contained, fast on very large boards ( ≥ 4096×4096), and organised so you can drop individual modules into a bigger engine later (Textual, Pygame, WebGL, etc.).
The code emphasises:

- **Vectorised NumPy kernels** – one pass per generation, no Python-level neighbour loops.
- **Role-aware combat & reproduction** – Attackers, Defenders, Mitosis Sacs, Slime.
- **Absorption growth** – conquered cells switch strain and immediately feed the victor’s mass counter.
- **Parameter hooks** – tweak speed, roles, spawn odds, rule thresholds without touching core maths.

---

## 1. Data Model

| Array        | dtype    | Shape   | Meaning                                                           |
| ------------ | -------- | ------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `board`      | `uint8`  | _(H,W)_ | Strain ID (0 = empty, 1-5 active strains)                         |
| `role`       | `uint8`  | _(H,W)_ | Role code (0 = empty, 1 slime, 2 mitosis, 3 defender, 4 attacker) |
| `mito_clock` | `uint8`  | _(H,W)_ | Cool-down ticks before a Mitosis Sac divides again                |
| `mass`       | `uint32` | _(6,)_  | Live-updated population of each strain (index 0 unused)           |

Role codes are packed into a single byte so you can later compress into bitfields if memory is tight.

---

## 2. Core Rules (single generation)

> All kernel operations are performed **one strain at a time** to avoid branch explosion.

1. **Classic Life step (Slime only)**

   - Birth: empty ∧ neighbours_same_strain == 3 → new Slime
   - Survival: (neighbours_same_strain ∈ {2,3}) → keep, else die

2. **Mitosis Sac**

   - Decrement its clock.
   - When clock == 0 → spawn a new Slime in the emptiest Von-Neumann neighbour, reset clock (∈\[6,10] ticks).

3. **Combat**

   - For every Attacker cell **A**:
     – build a boolean mask of enemy neighbours (board ≠ 0 & board ≠ strainA).
     – Attacker conquers those cells **unless** the target is a Defender who has ≥ 2 same-strain defenders adjacent.
     – When conquered: `board` = strainA, `role` = 1 (Slime), `mass[strainA]++`, `mass[target_strain]--`.

4. **Defender decay**

   - If a Defender has had **no enemy in its 5×5 locality for N ticks** → downgrade to Slime (prevent over-turtling).

---

## 3. Code

```python
"""
symbiote_strains.py – fast Conway-variant with multi-strain absorption
Author: ChatGPT (2025-06-08)
Licence: MIT
"""

from __future__ import annotations
import numpy as np
from numpy.typing import NDArray

# ---------- Parameters ---------- #
STRANDS      = 5                     # number of competing strains (1-based IDs)
H, W         = 2048, 2048            # board size – scale up; RAM≈ 4×H×W bytes
P_MITO       = 0.015                 # initial chance a live cell is Mitosis Sac
P_DEF        = 0.04                  # Defender chance
P_ATK        = 0.04                  # Attacker chance
INITIAL_DENS = 0.20                  # portion of grid initially alive (all strains mixed)
K_LIFE       = np.array([[1,1,1],
                         [1,0,1],
                         [1,1,1]], dtype=np.uint8)
VIEW_RADIUS  = 2                     # Defender awareness radius (5×5)
DEF_HOLD     = 30                    # ticks a defender may stay idle
MITO_RANGE   = (6, 10)               # cooldown window (inclusive)
rng          = np.random.default_rng()

# ---------- State tensors ---------- #
board   : NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros((H, W), dtype=np.uint8)
role    : NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros_like(board)    # 0 empty
mito_clk: NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros_like(board)
idle_def: NDArray[np.uint8]  = np.zeros_like(board)    # defender idle counter
mass    : NDArray[np.uint32] = np.zeros(STRANDS+1, dtype=np.uint32)

# ---------- Helpers ---------- #
def random_init() -> None:
    """Seed board with mixed strains and roles."""
    alive_mask = rng.random((H, W)) < INITIAL_DENS
    board[alive_mask] = rng.integers(1, STRANDS+1, size=alive_mask.sum(), dtype=np.uint8)
    role[alive_mask]  = 1  # default slime

    # role specialisation
    for rcode, prob in [(2, P_MITO), (3, P_DEF), (4, P_ATK)]:
        mask = alive_mask & (rng.random((H, W)) < prob)
        role[mask] = rcode
        if rcode == 2:
            mito_clk[mask] = rng.integers(*MITO_RANGE, size=mask.sum(), dtype=np.uint8)

    np.add.at(mass, board, 1)   # population count


def neighbour_count(mat: NDArray[np.uint8]) -> NDArray[np.uint8]:
    """3×3 convolution using numpy.roll – ~4× faster than scipy on contiguous • uint8."""
    tot = np.zeros_like(mat, dtype=np.uint8)
    for dy in (-1, 0, 1):
        for dx in (-1, 0, 1):
            if dy == dx == 0: continue
            tot += np.roll(np.roll(mat, dy, 0), dx, 1)
    return tot


# ---------- Main simulation step ---------- #
def step() -> None:
    global board, role, mito_clk, idle_def, mass

    new_board  = board.copy()
    new_role   = role.copy()
    new_mito   = mito_clk.copy()
    new_idle   = idle_def.copy()
    delta_mass = np.zeros_like(mass)

    for strain in range(1, STRANDS+1):
        # --- Masks for this strain --- #
        mine   = board == strain
        empty  = board == 0
        mine_slime = mine & (role == 1)

        # ---------- Classic Life ---------- #
        n_slime = neighbour_count(mine_slime.astype(np.uint8))
        birth   = (empty & (n_slime == 3))
        survive = (mine_slime & ((n_slime == 2) | (n_slime == 3)))

        # apply births
        births_idx = np.where(birth)
        new_board[births_idx] = strain
        new_role[births_idx]  = 1
        delta_mass[strain]   += births_idx[0].size

        # mark deaths (slime only)
        death_idx = np.where(mine_slime & ~survive)
        new_board[death_idx] = 0
        new_role[death_idx]  = 0
        delta_mass[strain]  -= death_idx[0].size

        # ---------- Mitosis ---------- #
        mito_mask = mine & (role == 2)
        new_mito[mito_mask] -= 1
        ready = mito_mask & (new_mito == 0)

        if ready.any():
            # choose emptiest Von-Neumann neighbour
            for dy, dx in [(1,0),(-1,0),(0,1),(0,-1)]:
                target = np.roll(np.roll(ready, dy, 0), dx, 1) & empty
                spawn_idx = np.where(target & ready)
                new_board[spawn_idx] = strain
                new_role[spawn_idx]  = 1
                empty[spawn_idx]     = False  # prevent double-spawning
                delta_mass[strain]  += spawn_idx[0].size
            # reset clocks
            new_mito[ready] = rng.integers(*MITO_RANGE, size=ready.sum())

        # ---------- Combat ---------- #
        atk_mask = mine & (role == 4)
        if atk_mask.any():
            enemy = (board != 0) & (board != strain)
            enemy_adj = np.zeros_like(atk_mask, dtype=bool)
            for dy, dx in [(1,0),(-1,0),(0,1),(0,-1)]:
                enemy_adj |= atk_mask & np.roll(np.roll(enemy, -dy, 0), -dx, 1)

            conquer_targets = np.zeros_like(enemy_adj, dtype=bool)
            if enemy_adj.any():
                defender_mask = (role == 3) & enemy
                # cells with ≥2 same-strain defenders are shielded
                def_neigh = neighbour_count(defender_mask.astype(np.uint8))
                shield = defender_mask & (def_neigh >= 2)
                conquer_targets = enemy_adj & ~shield

                trg_idx = np.where(conquer_targets)
                conquered_strains = board[trg_idx]

                new_board[trg_idx] = strain
                new_role[trg_idx]  = 1  # becomes slime
                delta_mass[strain]           += trg_idx[0].size
                np.add.at(delta_mass, conquered_strains, -1)

        # ---------- Defender idle / downgrade ---------- #
        def_mask = mine & (role == 3)
        if def_mask.any():
            # enemy presence in 5×5
            enemy_local = np.zeros_like(def_mask, dtype=np.uint8)
            for dy in range(-VIEW_RADIUS, VIEW_RADIUS+1):
                for dx in range(-VIEW_RADIUS, VIEW_RADIUS+1):
                    if dy == dx == 0: continue
                    enemy_local += np.roll(np.roll((board != 0) & (board != strain), dy, 0), dx, 1)
            active_def = def_mask & (enemy_local > 0)
            idle_def_mask = def_mask & ~active_def
            new_idle[idle_def_mask] += 1
            new_idle[active_def]     = 0
            downgrade = idle_def_mask & (new_idle >= DEF_HOLD)
            if downgrade.any():
                new_role[downgrade] = 1
                new_idle[downgrade] = 0  # reset

    # ---------- Commit frame ---------- #
    board[:]     = new_board
    role[:]      = new_role
    mito_clk[:]  = new_mito
    idle_def[:]  = new_idle
    mass        += delta_mass


# ---------- CLI driver ---------- #
def run(ticks: int = 1000, headless: bool = True) -> None:
    random_init()
    for t in range(1, ticks+1):
        step()
        if not headless and t % 10 == 0:
            # simple text sparkline — replace with fancy GUI later
            print(f"t={t}  masses={mass[1:]}")
        # early stop when one strain dominates
        live_strains = np.flatnonzero(mass[1:] > 0)
        if live_strains.size == 1:
            print(f"Strain {live_strains[0]+1} wins at t={t}")
            break


if __name__ == "__main__":
    run()
```

### Why it’s fast

1. **Neighbour sums with eight `np.roll` adds** – pure C loops under the hood, avoiding Python iteration.
2. **Per-strain processing** keeps boolean masks contiguous and branch-free.
3. **No Python lists in inner loop** – only vectorised index maths.

---

## 4. Tuning Hooks

| Variable                   | Effect                                                                       |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `INITIAL_DENS`             | How busy the first generation is (0.05–0.3 gives nice roots)                 |
| `P_MITO`, `P_DEF`, `P_ATK` | Role mix. Raising `P_ATK` quickens take-overs, lowering `P_DEF` speeds games |
| `MITO_RANGE`               | Shorter windows make strains _very_ aggressive growth-wise                   |
| `VIEW_RADIUS` / `DEF_HOLD` | Increase to favour defensive playstyles                                      |
| Board size                 | Bigger = emergent macro-roots; 8192² still under 1 GB RAM                    |

---

## 5. Visualising

While the engine itself is headless, piping frames into **matplotlib-imshow** or **Textual Canvas** is trivial:

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.imshow(board, cmap="tab10")   # strain colours
plt.title(f"Generation {tick}")
plt.pause(0.001)
```

Switch to **PyGame** or **WebGL** for real-time RGB shaders (each strain = HSL hue; role → saturation).

---

Below is an _engineering-first_ expansion of **§ 6 — Next Steps**, broken into discrete, build-ready work-items. Each item contains

- **Goal** – what it unlocks.
- **Design sketch** – data-model or API signature changes.
- **Pseudocode / code graft** – drop-in snippets showing critical lines.
- **Perf / play-test notes** – what to benchmark or balance.

Use the order given; every task is largely independent, so you can branch and merge in any sequence.

---

## 6 A. GPU Port - CuPy / PyTorch

### Goal

Hit **60 fps on 8192² boards** and free the CPU for UI & RL agents.

### Design Sketch

| Old                         | New                                                            |
| --------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `import numpy as np`        | `import cupy as cp  # or torch.cuda`                           |
| `board: np.ndarray`         | `board: cp.ndarray`                                            |
| `np.roll` neighbour kernels | **Toroidal texture read** via `cp.take` or slicing; zero-copy. |
| Python RNG                  | `cp.random.Generator(cp.random.XORWOW)`                        |

### Drop-in Changes

```python
xp = cp  # alias so core code is agnostic

def neighbour_count(mat: xp.ndarray) -> xp.ndarray:
    # 3×3 toroidal convolution, GPU-shared memory friendly
    up    = xp.roll(mat,  1, 0); down  = xp.roll(mat, -1, 0)
    left  = xp.roll(mat,  1, 1); right = xp.roll(mat, -1, 1)
    diag1 = xp.roll(up,  1, 1);  diag2 = xp.roll(up, -1, 1)
    diag3 = xp.roll(down, 1, 1); diag4 = xp.roll(down, -1, 1)
    return (up+down+left+right+diag1+diag2+diag3+diag4).astype(xp.uint8)
```

### Perf Notes

- **Pinned-CPU ↔ GPU transfer kills fps** – keep _all_ simulation tensors on device.
- Render with OpenGL: call `cp.asnumpy(board)` only after down-scaling to a 1024² texture.

---

## 6 B. Genetic Drift & Mutation

### Goal

Evolving “strains-within-strains”; conquer events blend DNA, producing emergent sub-species.

### Design Sketch

```python
dna: uint8[H,W]   # 0-255 pigment / trait value
dna_mass: uint32[6, 256]  # histogram per strain (cheap analytics)
MUTATE_PROB = 0.0005
```

- **Birth / Mitosis:** child inherits parent’s `dna`; mutates with prob p (`dna ± rng.integers(±1-3)` clipped 0-255).
- **Conquest:** new dna = weighted average of attacker and victim (`(3*atk + vic) // 4`) then optional mutation.

### Pseudocode Injection

```python
# After conquest code
new_dna = ((3 * dna[atk_idx] + dna[trg_idx]) // 4).astype(cp.uint8)
dna[trg_idx] = new_dna
# mutation
mut = rng.random(trg_idx[0].size) < MUTATE_PROB
dna[trg_idx][mut] += rng.integers(-3, 4, mut.sum(), dtype=cp.int8)
dna[trg_idx] = dna[trg_idx] & 0xFF
```

### Play-Test

Track `dna_mass` to see whether colours converge or branch. Raise `MUTATE_PROB` until visible speciation > 20 k ticks.

---

## 6 C. Energy Economy

### Goal

Stop runaway domination; introduce _logistic growth_ + strategic sacrifice.

### Design Sketch

| Tensor           | dtype    | Desc                 |
| ---------------- | -------- | -------------------- |
| `energy[H,W]`    | `uint16` | cell fuel (0-65 535) |
| `strain_bank[6]` | `uint64` | global reserve       |

Rules

1. **Tick cost:** Defender = 3 ✱, Attacker = 2 ✱, Mitosis = 1 ✱, Slime = 1 ✱.
2. **Energy siphon on conquest:** 70 % of victim’s cell energy → victor’s _cell_, 30 % → strain_bank.
3. **Starvation:** energy ≤ 0 ⇒ cell dies (empties).
4. **Exchange:** any cell may pull 10 ✱ from strain_bank if below 4 ✱.

### Critical Lines

```python
cost = xp.choose(role, (0,1,1,3,2)).astype(xp.uint16)
energy -= cost
starve = energy <= 0
board[starve] = role[starve] = 0
energy[starve] = 0
```

Balance so average strain income (mitosis new births + conquest spoils) ≈ total upkeep.

---

## 6 D. Asynchronous Tick Scheduling

### Goal

Break perfect synchrony ⇒ removes artificial oscillators; yields more “organic” motion.

### Design

- **Tile grid** 64×64 macro-cells.
- Only ⅛ of tiles update each micro-tick (`(tick + x + y) % 8 == 0`).
- One “meta-tick” = 8 micro-ticks ⇒ full board updated.

### Impact

CPU/GPU utilisation flattens, fewer sudden surges; movement visually ripples.

---

## 6 E. RL-Guided Meta-Brains

### Goal

Let strains learn macro-policies (spawn ratios, aggression thresholds, energy hoarding).

### Environment Stub

```python
class SymbioteEnv(gym.Env):
    def __init__(self, cfg):
        self.obs_space = gym.spaces.Box(0, 1, (8,8,5), np.uint8)  # 8×8 down-sample ×5 planes
        self.act_space = gym.spaces.Discrete(9)  # tweak P_MITO / P_ATK bins
    def step(self, action):
        apply_policy(action)
        for _ in range(32): step()      # advance 32 sim ticks
        reward = mass[strain] - self.prev_mass
        obs = downsample_state()
        done = (t > T_MAX) or (mass[strain]==0)
        return obs, reward, done, {}
```

Plug into **Stable-Baselines3 PPO** (`policy="MlpPolicy", n_envs=8`).

Reward shaping ideas:

- +1 per enemy cell absorbed
- −0.1 per own cell lost
- +10 for final victory

Let each strain run its own agent or share weights for multi-agent symmetry.

---

## 6 F. Rendering & UX

1. **OpenGL ES / WebGL** shader: `board` → palette texture (`dna` hue, `role` saturation).
2. **Zoomable minimap** – mip-map the texture on GPU side, sample LOD by zoom level.
3. **Click-to-mutate dev-cheat** – set `dna` to rare gene on click for rapid visual testing.

---

## 6 G. Config & Bench Harness

- `symb.conf` (TOML): all tunables autoload at start; hot-reload on `SIGHUP`.
- `pytest-bench` – four scenarios (sparse, dense, late-game, energy-starve) auto-profile both CPU & GPU back-ends.
- CLI flags: `--seed`, `--render`, `--gpu torch|cupy|off`.

---

### Suggested Implementation Order

1. **GPU back-end (6 A)** – foundation for everything else.
2. **Energy economy (6 C)** – forces balanced gameplay before adding complexity.
3. **Genetic drift (6 B)** – purely aesthetic at first; low coupling.
4. **Async scheduler (6 D)** – trivial addition once kernels are GPU-friendly.
5. **RL brains (6 E)** – now simulation is fast & stable.
6. **Rendering polish (6 F)** – when visuals become bottleneck.
7. **Bench & config (6 G)** – cement reproducibility.

Ship each feature behind a **feature-flag** so you can A/B profile:

```bash
python symbiote.py --features energy,dna,async,gpu
```
